So, could I also ask that everybody turns off their video except for the participants,
so that the zoom will record the four participants I'll turn off my video after the introduction as well.
Thank you.
What I'll do as well is I will spotlight.
Once we start I'll spotlight all of the four participants as well so they will be at the right.
Great thank you everyone.
So, yeah, I'd like to introduce a host for this evening Jonathan Rouson, Jonathan will be familiar to many of you, he's appeared on the channel a few times including recently in the fantastic conversation with john vivaki agent in the arena.
Jonathan is a chess grandmaster and philosopher, and has recently written or pulled together and written the introduction for a book on was going to be called a metamodernism reader.
What did it end up being called Jonathan. It's here, and it's called dispatches from a time between worlds crisis and emergence in metamodernity, and I'll explain why that title came to be in a few minutes.
So Jonathan, do you want to ask me.
Yeah David what's going on like what's what we're doing here but talking about metamodernism and rebel wisdom like tell me what it means to you because, you know, not necessarily in great depth but just curious to hear, you know, how did you first meet metamodernism your
first metamodernism meet me in a cross across a bar or, you know the term must have been heard in a conference or you heard someone using it people were getting excited about it.
But I'm curious to know how you came to it, whether, whether it was fondly or in a sort of oppositional position, and how that led to tonight's event.
That's a good question I'd say that I'm.
I don't fully understand it and I feel a certain level of ambivalence towards the concept. I get. I mean it's, it's clearly it's a little bit like game be in a way it seems like a placeholder for something that feels generally right that we need some deeper
information of the, of the postmodern turn. So something in that place sounds right and I like the sound of.
I like the descriptions that are attached to it but I find it kind of slightly ungraspable and very academic.
And I struggle to, I have a sense of what it means and I see some art pieces that I would consider to be metamodern, or at least seem to me to be sort of in that space playing with things in a sort of postmodern way but with a sense of sort of
not, not just in a kind of slightly playful or nihilistic way but pointing towards a resolution, but I don't often hear people in the metamodern space talking about so I, I feel like, I feel like it's a valuable conversation it feels a little bit academic and
to me and so I'm interested in where it meets the real world and yeah and I'm here as a viewer as much as anything to learn more about this, this, this thing.
Okay great well thanks David and we're going to do our best.
It felt similarly to David there. And there are those out there who feel like really metamodernism you need such a clunky term.
I mean metas bad enough modernism is bad enough put them together. You seem to have this kind of gratuitously complex term, which is apparently going to somehow save the world and that seems wildly implausible at some level.
I'll be back up and say that tonight we're going to be speaking mostly the four of us.
I'm Jonathan Ryerson as David mentioned I came into this conversation partly as being one of two editors along with Lehmann Pascal of the book called dispatches from a time between worlds, but I'm delighted to be joined by three friends and colleagues
of sorts.
In no particular order, Lena Rachel Anderson is a philosopher from Denmark she is currently working principally on Nordic building but she has a very illustrious background as a philosopher has written many books.
And principally among them in recent years something called a Nordic secret, which is very much worth your time. She's also written about metamodernity as such a little pamphlet where she gives her own take on what this term means and why it matters to her.
I've never come across in different ways but as a very close confidant and advisor often through Twitter direct message, no less but nonetheless extremely useful for someone who really understands.
Well I think this sort of more academic cultural theoretical side of metamodernism so he's there as my sense checker for when I'm like, am I pushing this term too far.
Does this stack up with what you know of what the other guys think and so forth.
And he's been really invaluable in that process. And then we have last but certainly not least Daniel Gortz who is, I believe coming in tonight as Daniel rather than Hansi.
And of course an important part of the Hansi Freinacht character that has written really kind of almost cult classic texts on giving metamodernism a kind of political edge, linking it to developmental theory in particular, but creating visions for the
sort of political visions for the future that wrestle with the times that we're in.
Initially, I called the Listing Society and latterly the Nordic ideology.
And in the show notes eventually I'll try and twist David's arm to add in links to all of the things I've just mentioned, including a side view essay of Greg's I forgot to make reference to, which is simply called what is metamodernism and why does it matter.
And that's what tonight's about now I should say that each of us come to this question in somewhat different ways we're not by any means a kind of team in any meaningful sense we don't
necessarily view the term in the same way or use it in the same way. And it's not just a terminology there's even ideological differences for the philosophical differences.
But nonetheless, much of that I'm guessing for the audience watching now the rebel wisdom audience and the potential audience online is not as interesting as first of all getting to grips with
broadly speaking what is this thing and why does it matter and then we can get into the divergences of why emphasize this and not that. So that's how I hope to do it and that's why I'm going to go first.
And because I came to this a little bit like David with some ambivalence.
In fact, the title of this book I can share in all candor.
The reason this is called the spacious from a time between worlds and it has metamodernity sort of sprawled onto it. You can see that there.
And so some people call it metamodernity and it was going to be called the metamodern reader.
But what's quite interesting about the history of this term is that by the time that idea came to fruition about three years ago give or take.
And Hansi Freinax influence on the term was so great that people that was almost synonymous metamodernism and Hansi Freinax was they were almost co extensive.
So, to create a metamodern reader look to many of the people we wanted to write for it to be a kind of tacit endorsement of Hansi ism.
And that many people were reluctant to go with that. So then, you know, being the sort of diplomatic, try and keep everyone happy as far as possible kind of guy that I am.
We looked around different ways of doing this and we realized that in so far as I had a view of what metamodernism is at that point.
So that it seems to me to be the quintessential philosophy of a time between worlds that we are in some sense, witnessing the eclipse ladder years ending inexorable demise of modernity broadly conceived.
So we were waiting, expectively, creatively, prophetically perhaps some kind of new world, and that metamodernism is sort of grappling with that sort of simultaneous ending and beginning that we seem to be living through together.
And that's where the between worlds notion came from it also that that particular turn of phrase came from Zach Stein it was one of the authors in the book, who had written a lot about metamodern metaphysics.
And one of the authors dispatches from a time between worlds crisis and emergence and metamodernity was that we wanted to keep metamodern as an emphasis as a sort of cohering notion for the whole book.
But we also wanted to already open it up to show this is not just about one person's thinking or even if he is an invented person living in the Swiss Alps.
Unless it's, it's a broader notion that that many other people have a stake in. And as I got into it, I began to write my own preface for the book was really, I spent, maybe three months give or take doing the necessary reading to try and get my own feeling for it and I'm
just going to begin by actually reading out the introduction to the essay which is freely available online.
And metamodernism and the perception of context.
And you're welcome you can find that just by Googling is by me I'm going to read just the first two paragraphs you can land this in some way.
Metamodernism is a feeling and all that constitutes the feeling and all that flows from it.
When we consider the mystery of consciousness and the human drama playing out on this charming anomaly of a planet.
They're far from trivial. They have cosmological significance. The metamodern feeling co arises through the perception of our context writ large.
It is aesthetic in nature, epistemic in function, historical in character, and it serves the call into question, the purpose of the world as we find it, and the meaning of life as we know it.
If dear reader, you do not feel called upon to read further to try to understand more fully what metamodernism means. I cannot blame you, and even envy you a little life is short, there was work to do.
And we cannot dance with every ism that gives us the eye to paraphrase from Shakespeare's 12th night, some are born into metamodernity, some become metamodern, and some have metamodernism thrust upon them.
I am mostly in the latter camp. I didn't seek out this whatever it is word concept ideology pattern movement structure of feeling structure of feeling.
I have shaped sensibility episteme movement idea notion, yet somehow metamodernism found me.
I have used the term periodically, I've been called a metamodernist, and I have editorial responsibility for the book dispatches from a time between worlds crisis and emergency metamodernity.
As one of his many adoptive parents, I noticed I feel responsible for metamodernism and help hope to help it mature in some way. Okay.
That's the beginning and there's a whole other 12,000 words or so that follow that.
And I'm just going to speak off the cuff about where I am today, several months after writing that unstructured what it means to me now, and I, I still really value I feel less bashful about calling myself a metamodernist and I used to and I'll try and explain why.
I use the term perception of context, because I think that's the one of the better catch all terms for making sense of what metamodernism reports to do.
It purports to help you perceive what's going on at scale. Right.
How do we perceive we perceive cognitively we perceive emotionally, but we also perceive in a situated context, which is the early to mid 21st century in an internet infused era in something that's a new, arguably a new phase of geological time, which
might be an anthropocene, but might be more accurately called the capital is seen. In other words, a world that's been defined by the forces and modernity of which capitalism is preeminent.
It's a world that is not by any means entirely secular event that's often overstated in the West, but is one where religion is no longer taken for granted as something that people orient themselves towards in life.
What we perceive the context of the moment is to perceive something about ecological degradation, sort of a kind of informational explosion happening online.
The smartphone is the new access Monday and awareness of technology coming from not just from Silicon Valley but from around the world, radically reshaping our idea of what it is to be human.
The context we're like what am I to do as a mere individual to make sense of the world and act within it.
And that's where Meta Modernism comes in as a kind of holding pattern that says okay, I have sufficient complexity, no less and no more to make sense of what's going on for you.
And I need both of these terms to do it. First of all, we're still in a kind of modernity. It, some say it's over but if it is over it's dying very slowly.
It's still a kind of modernism in our education system in our economic system.
And post modernism is here too and I think when Lena speaks later speak about what it means for these things to be around at the same time.
We're not going through historical phases one to the other. So it's a mistake to think of Meta Modernism or Meta modernity as somehow a culmination of several prior stages, in which it's entirely a new thing.
And it's better to see it as the kind of thing that makes sense of multiple forms of cultural understanding, multiple kinds of sensibility, co-rising in one world.
And that's why we can follow our Twitter streams or our Facebook streams and see these extraordinary things happening, which on the one hand can be pre-modern you can watch like Islamic State cutting someone's head off.
And that's something much more modern you can see people earnestly talking about the stock market and talking about, you know, whether your child's going to get ahead and get into a good school.
And you can have someone speaking about trans rights and the debate thereof and identity politics of various kinds and that would be classically postmodern.
And then you have this different thing, which is something that says, all of these things are still there.
They are partially valid in some way. They all come from a sensibility that's still quintessentially human still part of us.
And so that's where the term becomes useful because it helps to the meta in Meta Modernism is a way of looking inside modernism.
It's a way of saying it still defines us, but this term gives us a reflexive relationship to it. And the meta there is quite humanistic and the reason that matters is that people sometimes think that it goes
through something like pre-modern, modern, post-modern, meta-modern is if it's some kind of sequential thing. No, that's not how I see it.
I think it's much better to understand it as the meta is a choice. The meta is a disposition and a kind of commitment to be in a certain kind of relationship to the forces that shape you.
So to give you a sort of some slightly further clarity on that.
If you refer to Meta Modernism and you think I know what Meta Modernism is, it's the philosophy of Meta Modernity. And what Meta Modernity is, it's the phase after post-modernity.
No, it's not the way to see it. The way to understand it is that Meta Modernity is the phase that is there alongside post-modernity, modernity, pre-modernity, even indigenous cultures as well.
But what's going on to be a Meta Modernist is actually to be a particular, it's to establish a relationship, to make a commitment to the times that you're in, to recognize that we're in a time between worlds.
That's what the meta means in this context. It's to relate to, it's a sort of self-referential quality of we are that. We are those creatures who are in a time between worlds.
We are the ones who have to fathom what the hell is going on and how we can possibly survive as a species nevermind thrive.
When we have this technology taking over the world, apparent ecological collapse, political systems breaking down, and yet we're lives full of hope, radiant sunshine, great time with friends, younger generations doing extraordinary things,
enormous acts of heroism and resistance all over the world. And in that context, we're called upon to make sense of how do we act.
So the meta in Meta Modernism for me is a kind of chirological commitment. It's a way of saying, it's not that it's the time before the time after, it's the time where the is a kind of injunctive the, it's a moment to make the resolve that we have to make sense of what's going on.
And to make sense, what makes Meta Modernism different, this is what brings in Daniel's work and to some extent Greg's.
The interiority of our lives is quintessentially important to make sense of what is happening. It's not enough to do systems analysis, not enough to look at the world at scale and see what's happening in the news.
And to look within, to some extent between, and arguably beyond, that's why the subtitle for my essay, Meta Modernism and the perception of context is the, the, let me get this right.
The cultural between the political after and the mystic beyond. So the cultural between Greg will speak to with more authority in a moment.
The political after Daniel, the vision thereof what do we do now, how do we make sense of what's next, the mystic beyond.
There are many different sources for this but it's a way of saying, if modernity is coming to an end.
One of the things that's one of the things that modernity did arguably was it severed the connection between the good the true and the beautiful and kind of broke them apart.
So you have a kind of scientific truth severed from the kind of ethics and aesthetics of the good and the beautiful.
And what one of the things Meta Modernism has to do is to take the responsibility of bringing these things back together to get there was a joke before we came on about what kind of truth we were talking about.
What I've been looking for is one that contains goodness and beauty as a kind of integral part of it.
So that's, that's the way to see it for me it's like, we need to realize that Meta Modernism is called for because we need to wake up to being in a time between worlds.
That's the kind of cultural in between feeling.
And I know that Greg can parse that with more finesse the between can mean many things there.
But we also need to political vision we need to know what the hell we're going to do next. That's where Daniels work quite quite important and we need the broad spectrum of perspective that Leonard's work brings as well.
And where I've reached now is at towards the end of the essay I was getting to so what the, the case for a Meta Modern metaphysics is quite strong, the case to actually try to do the kind of speculative work of trying to figure out what reality is like.
We're not going to go back to pre modern religion, but nor are we going to stay stuck in a kind of flat land postmodern context where the notion of the sacred struggles to be heard, where we don't quite know which ritual
practices to be following, where we're not quite sure what the meaning of life is, where arguably there is a meaning crisis as for Vicki would put it.
And so that's what I see as the kind of frontiers for metamodernism now it's something about keep on articulating what is this cultural moment we're in.
That's the challenge that's one of the first things metamodernism does. What is this moment what does it mean to be in a time between worlds. What does it mean for modernism and postmodernism to both be part of the world, and yet try to eclipse that or move beyond it.
And politically, non trivial, it's not just about the next election, those who metamodernists tend to see the problem in at scale and they see many converging threats and they realize that one guy winning election as opposed to the other is not going to cut it you need to think
much more deeply and systematically.
And then the mystic beyond I think we do have to question the entire meaning and purpose of life. That's also metamodern endeavor.
And for all of those reasons, I've become very comfortable being metamodern, I think it's all of those things. I think it can be some more than others. Some are truer to the Canon, some are a bit more speculative.
But they're all part of the picture for me. And that's why I'm happy to be here. And I'll be moving to the back right ever so slightly for the next six, well, 40 minutes or so.
And then with Greg actually next and the reason I want to go to Greg first is quite important just to set the scene for that.
I'm imagining that those people attending the event and watching online will have come across metamodernism in one of five different ways give or take the, the first will be the one that Greg speaks to, which is the kind of rich cultural
metamodernism in cultural artifacts including films and series.
Another will be through Dan Daniel and Hansie's books, and other will be through Lena and a more sort of historical contextualizing period, periodization of cultural forms.
There's also a new book by Jason Strong, there's a more sort of social theory, rich theoretical account of metamodernism as a kind of capacious, encompassing notion of different ways of doing theory, which has quite a lot of philosophical acuity and it's recommended.
It's a kind of umbrella term to be a metamodernist is this kind of philosophy of a time between worlds, loose catch all term for people who are somehow rethinking the world fundamentally.
Okay, all of those five are important but there is something particularly important about Greg's offering because metamodernism has its own intellectual dignity its own academic quality.
And I think you can't really get into what it means until you're grounded in that first. The question of whether you should end there as an open one.
But I think it's important to begin there. So Greg, if you could go next please.
Yeah, thank you for setting the stage with that great introduction Jonathan, and thank you, Jonathan and David for inviting me to this event and Lena and Daniel I look forward to our meeting of the minds.
For me the term metamodernism is a name for the aesthetic sensibility found in the arts, popular culture and areas such as religion, politics, philosophy, marketing, slang and humor that has emerged over the last 25 years or so, replacing
metamodernism as the dominant structure of feeling beginning perhaps in the more leading edges of culture but making its way into the mainstream over time.
In order to explain what the sensibilities actually like. I'll tell my own story of how I got interested in it.
I'm an older gen XR, which means my high school college and early adult years were in the 80s and 90s, which might be considered the peak of the postmodern era, at least in the United States my home.
I generally enjoy the fun of postmodern referentiality ironic detachment and surface surfing games, and on a deeper intellectual level I appreciated the attention postmodernism brought to the importance of context, the blurriness of boundaries, the interconnected situatedness of
perspectives and the perspectives of marginalized. However, I also felt that this irony soaked postmodern culture left not enough room for things like earnest self expression, vulnerability, appreciation of beauty and simple pride.
I yearned for all of these things and yet did not want to come across as uncool, clueless or cheesy.
So I wondered a lot as both a fan of the arts and being myself an artistically minded musician.
So I wondered eagerly if there would ever be a post postmodern movement, what that would look like and what it would be called.
Well in the first decade of our new century, I started noticing it.
Infolds five Elliott Smith, Sufjan Stevens, Death Cab for Cutie, Riley O'Kiley, novelists like Dave Eggers, Jonathan Franson, Jennifer Egan, films by a tours such as Miranda July, Wes Anderson and Michelle Gondry, television shows like six feet under community and Bojack Horseman.
They were all very different from each other and yet shared a certain vibe. They were clever and self aware enough to pass the postmodern cool test, yet very much made room for the nuances and intricacies of human emotion.
Now I am not myself an academic but my friend Linda Cerello, who was a religious studies scholar, discovered that scholars in the humanities philosophy and cultural studies had come up with a name for this sensibility metamodernism.
In the 2010 essay called notes on metamodernism published in the Journal of aesthetics and culture, Timoteas Vermeunan and Robin Van Denneker, described metamodernism like this ontologically metamodernism oscillates between the modern and the postmodern.
It oscillates between a modern enthusiasm and a postmodern irony between hope and melancholy between naivete and knowingness, empathy and apathy, unity and plurality, totality and fragmentation, purity and ambiguity.
Maybe by oscillating to and fro or back and forth, the metamodern negotiates between the modern and the postmodern.
One should be careful not to think of this oscillation as a balance, however, rather as a pendulum swinging between poles. So it's not a meeting in the middle but it's a swinging with each one having its own integrity and dignity.
That's that's my own little additional comment there.
Back to their quote, each time the metamodern enthusiasm swings towards fanaticism, gravity pulls it back towards irony the moment it's irony sways towards apathy gravity pulls it back towards enthusiasm.
In the essay, they gave examples of their metamodernism that lined right up with the trend Linda and I had noticed, and on a website that they founded with the same name as their essay.
Other researchers also began documenting the trend. Meanwhile, the concept spread and was used in the writings of other authors published in various academic journals, and spread further into the world where arts journalists and online video essayists use the concept of metamodernism to interpret
music, film, television, etc. In 2013, Linda and I started our own website. What is metamodern.com, where we have so far written about more than 100 examples of metamodernism.
Though I'm not an actual academic, I have had the opportunity to present about metamodernism at several academic conferences and with Linda as co author, have had a chapter published in a multi author academic volume on the paranormal and popular
culture. Linda and I in collaboration with the UK based AHRC metamodernism network are currently organizing the first North American conference on metamodernism slated for September in Seattle.
My own spin on metamodernism is this. Well, I think that the description of oscillation between modernist and postmodern qualities is apt. I don't feel like it does enough toward explaining what the motivation is for artists and their audiences to engage in the sensibility.
I believe that each episteme that precedes metamodernism is characterized by its own particular relationship to knowing, and I believe metamodernism does as well.
Tradition is about knowledge and ways of doing things that are passed down from elders and in canonical scripture.
Modernism is about clearing the decks of accumulated arbitrary tradition and using human rationality and inventiveness to discover new, more true and more universalized forms of knowledge.
The arts under modernism roughly 1880 to 1950 reflect this.
Postmodernism roughly 1950 to the late 90s turned modernism's critical eye back on itself and questions the very idea of objective independent universal truths.
It emphasized the ways that things were connected, more than the individual things themselves, and sought to understand the context in which any claim to truth arose.
Postmodern art forms often employ irony, intertextuality and the mining of sources that fall outside high brow aesthetics.
Metamodernism arose around the turn of the millennium, when artists and their audiences became dissatisfied with the way that postmodernism banished the self, the capacity for certainty and earnest emotion.
Metamodernism does not seek to turn the clock back to the time prior to postmodernism. Instead, metamodern cultural products generally find a way to satisfy the postmodern itch and re embrace a modernist sense of conviction.
So my formulation is metamodern cultural products serve to protect interior felt experience from the potential degradations of postmodern ironic relativism, modernist reductionism and the ontological inertia of tradition.
So why is this important? Why should people try to, why should people trying to understand the present moment care about metamodernism?
Before answering that question I should address a bigger one. Why are the arts in general important? And what is the value in making theories about the arts as we do when we theorize about metamodernism?
Well, I may be biased because I am someone who is very oriented towards the arts, but to me the arts are the most important tool we have as humans to understand ourselves, other people, the world and our relationships with other people in the world.
We use the arts and culture to build stories that help us see ourselves.
Why do we take, why do we make theories about the arts and culture?
Why not just enjoy the arts on their own without all this talking about them?
Because the arts and culture need a story too, a story about the stories and how they all fit together.
So when I talk about the modernist sensibility that prevailed in the first half of the 20th century, I'm telling a story that helps me understand the overall cultural unconscious of the people who historically influenced the world we have today.
When I talk about postmodernism in the second half of the 20th century, I'm telling a story about history and the backdrop of an earlier part of my own life.
And since the modernist and postmodernist tendencies continue today, as Jonathan very astutely mentioned, even as metamodernism emerges, it is useful to understand their impact on the present moment.
Metamodernism, of course, is a story about the present day and helps me weave together a metastory about things going on currently in the arts and popular culture.
So the role of the arts in helping us understand our lives has been important through all historical periods, not just with metamodernism.
However, metamodernism is particularly important right now as we grapple with so many factors that attack our sense of meaningfulness in life.
First, there is the lasting legacy of postmodernism that cared more about context than it did about the actual things surrounded by that context.
Then there is our present day hypermodern fractured internet reality with so many perspectives available that it leaves the self befuddled, searching for a stable place to stand.
Then there is also the present day emphasis on understanding the self as a member of an identity group.
There is value in people belonging to margin who belong to marginalized groups, joining forces to have their needs known and met, but sometimes this comes at the expense of the individualist sense of identity.
So metamodernism is a sensibility that you find in various cultural products that honors these kind of postmodern confusions and ambiguities, but makes an effort to restore the dignity of the interior self in various ways.
Even spiritual transcendence is yet one more factor that can have a side effect of undermining the self.
Of course, some may say that is the whole point of spiritual transcendence, but in any case metamodernism still wants to protect the interior and the personal.
There is an amazing new film out in theaters called everything everywhere all at once that many people I know urged me to go see describing it as metamodern through and through.
It involves people attaining a consciousness that spans multi multiple alternate realities, but it doesn't stop there. What is really about is how one can maintain the connection to the personal sense of self and family in the face of such spiritual transformation.
And that is part of what makes this movie so metamodern. It also has a tone that oscillates between wacky and profound deals and identity representation in a way that does not undermine the self and more I strongly recommend you go see it.
Speaking of recent examples of metamodern culture, a few other reference points. The singer Billy Eilish presents a persona that oscillates between postmodern norm busting goth chick, and sweet wholesome girl next door, while offering music that both reveres traditional forms and
the television Ted Lasso is almost groundbreakingly earnest, but presented in a self aware manner in which the show knows that it's wholesome earnestness is understood by the audience to be novel, thus calling attention to itself in an ironic postmodern sense while delivering the wholesome goodness.
Another fairly recent metamodern television show is fleabag, which plays all kinds of postmodern ish tricks with its form, but not simply for the postmodern priority of making audiences think about form, but also in order to gain access to deeper levels of its characters
and interiority. I think I'm hitting my time. So I will just leave it at that for now but I will say self promotionally if you want to see like how we treat a whole bunch of other examples of what we see as metamodernism again that our website is what is metamodern.com.
Thank you.
Thank you Greg is very civilized of you to finish on time and grateful for that sharing the, I've given in the show notes a link to your essay and the side view which I personally find really edifying on both your own take and to some extent how it relates to other takes on metamodernism so
thanks for joining us. I'm going to save Hansi for last, and I hear from Lena next.
I couldn't find my book in actually I just found it one second.
I just wanted to quickly show this. Yeah, yeah, because I am just moved house so I given up but by chance it appeared. And so, you know, Lena is has written the book as it were so every reason to trust her judgment on this.
She actually has a chapter in this book which we won't get into now I don't think but it's called, but do you have a vegetable garden and alluring title.
But for now, Lena, tell us what you think is going on. What is metamodernism. Why does it matter.
What's your own view.
Yeah, so I am actually old enough to remember the time before post modernism.
I was in the 70s and the 80s and I remember when two of my high school friends came home from Paris in 1984 and they had been to cafe cost in Paris that Philip Stark, designed, and they were like, and they had these chairs with bowling balls on them.
Because that was the sort of irony put into furniture and, and then we were.
There was this whole new thing about irony and I had kind of had this sort of self irony before that but certainly there was a whole culture that emerged with with this.
Yeah, these cross references of all kinds and then we had all the bat taste parties in the 1990, 1992, and then there was Pulp Fiction I think that was 94.
And so there was this new movement and so that would be my generation and, and so when I was in my 20s we all, you know, distance ourselves from ourselves and everything.
And at some point I sense that you can't live your life on this. I mean, there needs to be depth there needs to be a foundation under things you need to have honesty needs to have a soul and, and so actually in the late 90s I began to
start exploring this and I started writing about the future and I was, I wrote a book series in Danish called both and I'll spare you the Danish part of it but it's, it's five books and they're this thick and this is the both and Friday the last book and what I actually wrote as the very last
and this monster of sincerity and irony is that I write here irony is on the boundary or the border between meaning it and not meaning it.
I'm writing on the boundary or the border of irony. So that was actually my first attempt at metamodernism before I actually knew the word and I was back in 2009.
And so I've been working in this field for for a long time and it's.
I ran into Daniel and email in Stockholm and around 2012 13 sort of and Daniel was the one who found metamodernism on the internet and sent an email saying
we found something or Daniel found something that framed many of the discussions that we had that we had had.
And as I started exploring this and that was the article in the manifesto by a fund an anchor and for more than and I, I wrote about it actually already in 2007 16 before I wrote the Nordic secret.
I realized when I was working with metamodernism as a pendulum between the modern and the postmodern or juxtaposition or a blending I mean it can take many forms.
I realized that just having a culture of civilization and understanding of the world of just the modern and the postmodern is simply not deep enough there's all the stuff that went before it.
And, and not just the traditional
the Renaissance and from Gutenberg's invention of the printing present back to maybe the Bronze Age, there's something even before that that was radically different than the pre modern traditional traditional world which is the pre historic
modernism and so I started working in four cultural codes. And, rather than just, oh, the quoting signs from good old postmodernism the just the modern and the postmodern, and just having it as a sentiment.
I was more interested in trying to find out how can we create a meaningful future how can we get the best from the past with us into the future, and not lose things that cut the roots, so to speak, from our existential
making emotional lives and what it means to be human, and to make my, my version of metamodernity so I talk about metamodernity, and I do it, because I talk about a structure not a sentiment and I do it because I distinguish between talking
about for cultural codes that we need to combine or bring together.
Instead of just talking about to.
What I realized is that what we can take from the past and bring with us into the future which parts of the codes that we can bring with us depends on the group size of people if it's not going to turn into corruption.
I mean we got 300,000 years of being stone age people in hunter gatherer tribes or in an early horticulture and but still very small communities.
That is where you can have the intimacy the connection to nature the spirituality, the group sizes where you can read body language and have eye contact so you can spontaneously sense what is going on in the group and can we go this way or can we go in that direction.
So we all say yes to this idea do we say no and do we need to discuss it further before we make a decision.
When you have 2000 people in a bronze age city town or with 100,000 people in an iron age ring walled city.
You have to have governance in a different kind of way and when the most advanced communication technology you have little clay tablet and and cuneiform or litter pigeons or something like that, or horses, writing with scrolls of paper.
You have to have a hierarchical system otherwise you cannot keep peace and you know social peace within the community.
So we have shared narratives of shared imaginary and imaginary, imagine community and so religion turns out to be really useful, and it gives people a sense of community purpose rituals that bring people together and shared moral norms and so societies that
developed that survived societies that did not manage to develop that did not survive. And then we have the modern world with societies of millions of people and maybe hundreds of millions of people.
And here we have radio television print printing press. And so we can communicate with more people. And, and that is where we also developed the scientific process.
And so that goes well with hundreds of 1000 millions of people, but you, if you try to apply rule of law and democracy in a family of eight people, you would tear the social fabric and the emotions apart.
So let's try to take the sort of the emotional leadership of the small group and applied on a million strong society, and have a family deciding everything we call it corruption so you can't transfer the power structures from from between
and that would be one of my main takeaways and then you got postmodernism where we have all kinds of perspectives around the globe.
And that started in the 90s with the VCR and the disk man or the Walkman and the copying of cassette tapes sounds like you know, generations ago but that's how old I am.
So, so the, the, the different perspectives with that we needed to develop a way of handling came in the 90s and early 2000s.
And now we need to bring all of it together and one of the reasons we do need to bring all of it together is that we, I don't think we'll survive our own inventions and our own good intentions.
We try to tell everybody around the globe that we're going to take away your religion or we're going to create a new form of governance that is postmodern or or only modern, we need to be able to tell people and to tell ourselves that everything
you know that is meaningful to you, if it's religion, you can keep that but you have to add something, in this case, modernity and the postmodern, or if you're a modern person with the modern world view, taking that away from people is not going to work
and you can keep your modern science, your way of understanding the world from a modern perspective, but you have to add something I mean you need to connect with nature and spiritual way, like we did 10,000 years ago.
You also need to get them the postmodern deconstruction of everything.
And then on postmodernism, I think what I see around me is that we have a generation of young people who grew up during postmodernism and who unfortunately have grown up in societies that never gave them moral guidelines.
It's okay when you're 25 or older, but it's not great when you're six years old or seven years old. The child brain needs adults who take responsibility and who stand up for the way that the world is.
So we need to integrate into our culture if no other sake in order to be able to bring up children to be mentally healthy teenagers and young adults and adults.
We need to stand up for something as adults and tell children that oh this is the way it is in our home and now we do it like this. Instead of always saying so what do you feel like doing, because three year olds are not ready for it seven year olds are not ready for
it doesn't really work with 12 year olds either doesn't work with a 45 year old boyfriend either but that's a different story. So,
I mean we do need to bring these different layers together and I think we can find wisdom and ways of communicating being together and organizing things better if we have all the layers.
So that will be my take on metamaternity.
Thanks a lot. And then I've been very patient. I'm just going to sum up very briefly that my sense is, given the question was partly why does it matter. And David was also keen to get to that.
And my sense here in from Greg was, it matters about protecting interiority it's something to do with the kind of meaning that we need to feel, but also create.
It matters because that's what art does to some extent it helps to make sense of the world through these creative ventures and that the metamaternity is a particular way of doing that's called that's called for today in some sense.
And then Lena, there's a kind of different more structural analysis quite a useful distinction for those listing you feel a bit lost.
This sort of sentiment and structure or sensibility and structure is quite a useful way to think about it.
It would be relevant but you can emphasize one or the other and then is emphasizing structural features. These are the institutions and technologies, giving rise to cultural kind of epochs, and arguing that the reason metamaternism or metamaternity matters,
is because our sort of curriculum today our hidden curriculum or challenge is to bring the best from the past, but to somehow lose the worst, and but not to pretend that we could somehow wish away or Stone Age inheritance, or our modern modernist impulses
or postmodern perspectives that we have to somehow carry all of them with us in order to fashion a new world and that's why metamaternism matters because it speaks to that.
Now, with that said, Daniel I can see, I know that you're, you know, father of a young child and no doubt difficult to wait for so long to speak so I'm very grateful but now you are sort of Mr Metamaternism for lots of people.
And so tell me what is it and why does it matter.
Oh, one second, you're actually not connected anymore.
Let's see.
You're okay now. You're okay now.
I guess I'm mute. Yeah, you're fine now. Yeah.
I think for a lot of people, I would be the master metamaternism but actually, that's, I think that's sort of what it feels like for you and me and certain certain networks, if you look around the world, or Google metamaternism.
There's a lot more of the, let's say, Dutch School of Vermeerland, Madanak or Greg Denver's work, etc.
And of course, I think, in terms of just your readership, the Lina's pamphlet is probably outstripping minor hour books fairly well given a lot of people read the shorter introduction which overlaps a lot.
And since, I guess you could do a Venn diagram with all three, or even all four, I mean, Jonathan Rosen's positions.
And I hear myself leaning in a lot, or I feel myself leaning in a lot when you speak Greg, then I feel myself like, oh yeah, I also think like that.
And, well, yeah, obviously I have my own tape or version and there are a few things worth mentioning as background to that. So, one thing is, one thing is this term integralism.
And this is in a, in a way I think the original idea for this rebel wisdom thing was, was to, to follow up to the state of integral so people had discussed a little panel for I believe, having discussing, or panel three had discussing the state of the
integral theory, right. And, and I was really interested in that for a number of years.
And there were certain things that that stuff brought to my life. One thing was,
I was a sociologist, or studied sociology and wanted to pursue a career in that field, or, or some someone within the social sciences and, or at least the humanities.
And the whole thing was about critique. And that was often literally said by professors like what, what we offer society is critique.
And that seemed sort of, and also I wanted to, I wanted to be part of some some sort of meaningful political movement well okay things aren't good, the world and so many ways me what can you do.
Okay, I hang out at the anarchist cafe, or, or, but then I guess get the sense of hypocrisy around it, or, you know, would sit down with the libertarians and saying, pretty tunnel visioned.
I didn't commit to any of these things right. So I wanted to do something positive, but I was too critically minded, you know, maybe by training, and maybe by, or just skeptical by nature or personality.
So I couldn't really commit to anything. So I, you know, had this lack within me.
You also mentioned.
And so that was from a social science perspective but also I suppose from an existential perspective that, while I had this like I really wanted to work to change stuff by, in many ways, even though I had a good upbringing.
I was was an entirely happy and during my, my young years and had had anxieties and so forth.
So, well you know and if you think about that as a sociologist or social psychologist you.
Obviously you start thinking my well there there are structural structural things going on there there are things about society can be different life could feel different.
So in comes around age 25 this stuff integral theory and it does several things for me that puts together a lot of like it has it works with these metamaps, or where you put together different ways of the world.
The ways are a little bit clunky, but they're so much better than having the maps that was my experience. They bring in within these maps they also relate on the interiors are interior experience.
They are another side of everything that we experience as objects out there in the world you can't really have one without the other.
So it's okay to explore.
It's a key to explore things that aren't necessarily things as it's okay to explore, you know, just being just your awareness, just how things arise within you, your inner depths.
It's okay to cultivate introspection or you'll never bust your own bullshit. That's not going to happen as to that as the cognitive scientists tell us again again, but, but at least there is something like coming to terms with that there is at least.
I guess it opened up, it gave me it gave a legitimacy to the inner dimension right and plunging into that.
A lot of the anxieties that have been in my life sort of cleared up as really, and at the same time I had these maps for putting together all this social science, etc.
There's also this idea of development right development from developmental psychology that made its way into integral theory.
There's, there's a direction, even if it's not necessary well for integral theorists is often a teleological direction you believe that God is like manifesting new ways or forms.
It felt that way but, but at least that, aha, in theorists such as Piaget, for instance, if given the right circumstances, and it is likely that that person can mature and recognizable and recognizable matters.
And that, that sort of gives hope kind of gives an inner compass, you can ask yourself like, okay, so what's the problem right now.
And instead of like, where's the evil how do we destroy it how do we move it right. There's the sense of like how do we help gently cultivate scaffold, etc.
Something.
The next thing to emerge that would redefine the situation so that the thing that seemed insoluble or an awful conflict or, or anxiety provoking or something else with
that feel different, right. And it's, I suppose, and we had a few rounds negotiating the terms even for this call right and, and in situations like that, it's oftentimes about redefining, redefining what the whole thing is about finding new angles.
And voila, there is actually where there seem to be a conflict there war or conflicting interests or lack mutual trust or something, you actually have something extra valuable on something the case right.
And then the more I actually, the more troublesome the other, the deeper the inside about myself that they'll have it's all of those things right.
So, so, I mean, so those those ingredients show up right like I can you can map different perspectives if you understand the property spaces within which you, you understand the world, you can, you can actually
cultivate the spiritual sides of life, including the aesthetic and, or existential or philosophical and, or even religious if you if you want.
And there might be some, whatever, however hopeless, whatever cost your fuck where you happen to be in at the moment they usually is some sort of, they're usually some sort of higher solution even even if you can't see it right now right.
So, and then that there's some kind of directionality and that those directionalities are recognizable.
So I got really interested in using this interval perspectives.
However, I also got very disappointed with it, because it.
Yeah, I, you've been pointing this out and that like the integral perspective oftentimes big sin too much.
I mean, basically, basically, one way or another back to the Vedic roots of Eastern religion, and though, and it's sort of never shakes off that heritage, and that that leads to a lot of magical thinking sneaking in here and
there is even a cult among, or actually now two cults that came out of the integral movement.
And the second cult was smaller but yet more awful than the first one and still ongoing.
And, and also, you know, I just, I just thought, as a framework wasn't I noticed when I tried to organize politics and stuff political party in Sweden rounded noticed it wasn't so good as the social theory.
And, you know, it's kitschy also just like you always have these Alex great paintings and they're all from from some kind of psychedelic trip or something or or a very, very high cost experience and I mean, I, you can have experiences there are people
who have experiences that correspond to those to the, you know, sheer colorful mess energy and vibrancy of such images, but you're inappropriate in most contexts and for most people.
And they will look hysterical and kitschy, and that will repel people and more and more people are repelled except the folks who are attracted to that stuff.
And we then become more and more magical and they're thinking and they're called like what I call the astrology precariat like tendencies that show up so metamodernism shows up as another term for because integralism wanted to be an answer to metamodernity post modernity
post modernity which I had experienced within the frame of social science.
So, metamodernism was kind of.
Well, Thomas Steiner once said this German professor, he said, aha. So metamodernism is, is a design intervention, in a sense, in that in integralism.
Well, yeah.
I wanted to bring that term in and married to the good stuff from, from, from into real theory.
So as to make integral theory safe for democracy so because it wasn't safe for democracy, it explodes it exploded into totalitarian bullshit, again and again.
And that's, that's sort of where, where I found it and where I wanted to use it.
And what it has those things right irony sincerity, but when you like, when you're getting to kids you make a joke about it, whoop, back again but like okay.
So, so, yeah, I, and I don't actually disagree with you, then when you say that could be metamodernism.
And it's an integration of modern progress and hope, and we're oscillation between.
Daniel, just what just one second just a hope it might help rather than interrupt you, but just just because I'm thinking of as you were speaking that I remember coming across this view to try and make sense of Hansi that it was necessary to do the relationship to integral, which
is familiar to most rebel wisdom viewers to we don't need to lay it out but it principally through the work of Ken Wilbur many books, many developmental models, often with quite a strong spiritual theme, often giving rise to a sort of four quadrant map of
reality. So the, the, the integral world was, was seen as a sort of toolkit to get beyond post modernism and you were saying that it didn't quite work for you for various reasons, partly for the reasons you've laid out, but I wanted to just read this bit
to you because the way I put it here is to make sense of your work to put it straightforwardly.
The top text of Hansi's books is that he is saying integral theory has failed and metamodernism is now called for in that quest hands the attempts to use the sensibility of cultural metamodernism that he has kidnapped to usurp integral
theory and to subsume it within political metamodernism. And that's the sort of, sort of, you're using the sort of cultural cold from the metamodernism that Greg sort of described to create something that goes beyond integral
theory but somehow transcends and includes it in some way, and makes it more political and more, more developable more sort of injunctive more like let's do this not just describing the world but actually more like a programmatic.
How you'd see it if I got that right.
There were a couple loaded words there to be fair but, but sure.
By the way, it was, you know, Shanghai was the word you use which I also use.
And as that that's sort of where, well, I was, I suppose I was closing up to saying that that that's where a more political metamodernism came from.
And then the metamodern sentiment seem to have what what integralism lacked. Oh, and yes, this is where I was going I don't necessarily disagree with you.
When you say metamodernism is the integration of these two things, modernity, modernity, modernism and postmodernism, because ism then is of course a striving towards or, or, or, well, something that is ish ish as something that looks like something
or tries to become something like something metamodernism.
It looks like metamodern smells like metamodern or wants to go towards metamodern, where Miss metamodernity would be something more established a state of affairs, right.
So think about that.
It kind of makes sense that the, that first the ism would do would integrate the first two elements, the two dominant elements of our day and age I speak on modernism and postmodernism.
And to fully manifest, it really needs to go back farther into deeper layers of the psyche I suppose and collective psyche, and it also, and then farther back in history.
And then it would integrate, integrate traditionalism and, and indigenous inside as well.
That's, however, it should be pointed out that that's what what integralism in many ways was already trying to do.
And many ways, why I opted for what I saw as a more conservative integralism, let's at least try and get this part right, because what into when integralism did try to integrate tradition or traditional religion.
It did, you know, go magical and so forth right, which did lead to its collapse. So, so I do view it as, as a maturation towards that attractor point.
And I would want to call that attractor point modernity. I suppose I'm just from this experience of the with integralism and so forth.
I just want to be a little bit conservative about it. And that's why I for now use the term metamodernism for particularly modernity and postmodernity.
Thank you. Thank you very much. And I mean, again, as I sort of tried to summarize with Greg and Lena, what came through for me there was your sense of.
Well, first of all, helpfully grounding in the personal which I always find useful when you're speaking of theory like where does this come from certain challenges in life anxieties trying to make sense of the world noticing that you were caught up in systems and structures.
You know, appearing visually Daniel there we go. And noticing that that was the case and then reaching for theory to make sense of it.
Find coming upon integral theory and feeling that it was somehow lacking that it, as you put it lapsed into magical thinking and simultaneously observe this new kid on the block of some kind metamodernism noticing the ethos to vibe.
It's kind of somewhat more mature arguably perspective and you thought I can make sense of that and make use of it vis a vis the other work that I want to do politically and that's what led to the listening society and so forth.
So that's kind of laying it out I'm, I'm feeling I'm curious, you know, I'm sort of going to imagine what David would say here rather than ask him even though he is there.
But I'm not sure we've really convinced people that it matters yet. Like I want to use the remaining time.
Can you kind of hammer that home because we've, we've, we've described it I've just, you know, summarize you've all tried we all tried our best to make sense of why it matters.
But I'm wondering if the audience feels it. If you know do you need if you know, if metamodernism is the answer what is the question will be one way of looking at it, or if I don't have metamodernism what do I like would be another.
Can any of you try and speak to that.
I was, I was, I mean we are in a time where things are a lot of things are up in the air. We've had a financial crash in 2008.
We have technologies that are wrecking havoc on job markets we have a war now in Ukraine.
And, and so there are structures that are breaking up.
We're brought together with people from around the globe online. And so we are confronted with very different viewpoints and there's also more more migration than we've ever had before so the natural, and I would call that a natural inclination to identify with an in group and think
that there is one truth in the world is constantly challenged.
And we need to deal with that and, and post modernism has tried that for, I guess, one or two generations, and we create anxiety because if you can't connect.
I would honestly deeply emotionally to and with other people and cultural heritage and language and symbolic worlds and I can refer back to Eric from who talked about the escape from freedom, and he said that moral aloneness is when you are.
You can be around other people but you're not sharing a symbolic world which is way worse than being physically alone and feeling that you have all these people out there that you're actually emotionally and morally connected with.
And so if we have a civilization where whenever you say, Oh, I like this and somebody says yeah but you could also not like it, or somebody else like something better in a different way with you have your honest emotions deconstructed all the time.
You end up with, I mean, then you'll never even be able to feel yourself.
And so we've reached a point where I think a lot of people, particularly young people who grew up with this have suffered and do suffer and, and, and they have a really hard time finding communities where people actually care about them.
They have a hard time connecting with people they have a hard time finding friends they have a hard time finding commitment and love they have a hard time.
Look at pinder I mean the sex has become a commodity I mean it's like you just you know,
which one way or the other. And so the deep connection the intimacy is something that we we've almost lost the words for the language for it.
And so we need to reconnect with that. And we can't do that was post modernism and we can't skip post modernism either because then we lose an analytical tool.
We need all of that and we do need the religious heritage and to go into I mean that's why sports play such a huge role and if we don't have animism and we don't have that contact to nature, then we got conspiracy theories.
Because we need that idea of oh something is behind it and and is in charge of everything, and, and they are doing it.
And that used to be the spirits and nature now it's I don't know Hillary Clinton and some alien reptiles and a pizza joint.
So where we don't give our minds this heritage and meaningful connection, it's going to go out and create it and make it on its own.
And all of that sounds like it makes sense. The challenge though I still feel is and I have noticed this from some of the questions in the audience.
And I don't think people doubt, or at least few do that the world is struggling in certain ways and that we're struggling to make sense of it, because we seem to seem to be a mismatch between the conceptual resources available.
And the world as we experience it. What it what remains to be proven is that metamodernism helps us to do that and you've tried to say that postmodernism doesn't do it and we need something else and you've also explained why metamodernism is that
thing and all of us in our own ways try to do that. What I'm suppose I'm looking for in this last bit before we take the other questions is, you know, concepts at all, you know, like the whole notion that someone like I don't know who isn't philosophically inclined,
that doesn't get high on conceptual distinctions.
Why would they feel the need for this like can they not go about their business without it. Greg.
I agree with, yeah, I agree with Lena's depiction of the problem that we face, of course.
And Daniels as well I think where I differ and where the kind of community of scholars and arts critics or whatever that I'm kind of affiliated with is, we don't see metamodernism as much of an aspirational thing that we're working towards as we see it as something
that's actually already happening in society, whether people have the word for it or not. And it's easiest of course to, you know, to locate it and talk about it when you're talking about things in the arts, because you have specific cultural products and you can analyze them and
interpret them and stuff but it's also present in the style of humor that regular everyday people use when they're communicating with each other.
And even just kind of in our slang terms and you know in all kind and it shows up in the ways that people appreciate and get behind the political leaders that they they like.
And so, on the one hand, I think metamodernism is already doing that job, you know, to an extent of giving us a room and a space, you know, a safe space for meaningfulness and dignity about our interiority.
Why, so on that level it's already doing a job. And then the value in having a word for it, and having discussions about it among the kind of people who think that way, not everybody, you know, the majority of humans don't care about the word post modernism or
modernism, either they just live their lives. But among those of us who kind of do tell stories about the stories to have the name metamodernism is kind of like a flag that helps us recognize that this motion is taking place, that
there's a need for it that there might be a need for more of it.
And, you know, you mentioned Jason just some storm who put out a book called metamodernism, and he's bringing this approach to the way that scholars and theorists do their work.
So he's suggesting a correction for the excesses of the kind of post modern academic style that does often leave everybody in the dust, and suggesting a way that that can be done that is more humane and human and things like that.
So, I guess the short answer is metamodernism is a solution that's already happening. And by naming it and seeing it and understanding it, we can have it happen more.
Okay.
Got it. So listen, there are some questions on the list. Let me give me a second. You both want to speak. Okay. Well, that's good.
Let's speak then. You go first, Daniel.
Yeah, I mean, I'd like to reply as well to the whole why metamodernist question. First of all, dodge or avoid the question. I mean, it's, yeah, this is sort of a trap question.
Sort of a what's really sort of a sort of a trap question. Right.
It trans web, like, how would you want to sell, like, ah, so then, then you automatically get go into Carl salesman's mode or whatever and and the person on the other side then by reverse psychology automatically doesn't want doesn't want to buy what you're saying because hey, I'm being taught into something
right. So, so numero no is metamodernist doesn't have to talk anything anyone into anything right. It's a tool. First of all, it's just a word right so then then people attach five or six different meanings to it.
Those have been mapped out.
It's a topic. It's a discipline.
So, if you study a topic or discipline there will be different fruits in your life, depending on which take you have on it.
I can tell, from my perspective, it's a cheat code, basically, you walk around in society, you, you can basically see around corners.
That's what it does right if you actually study it hard, and you see, well, see, wow, there's a cultural logic to this there, there are patterns that people aren't seeing.
It opens doors.
Okay.
Etc, etc, etc. And then that is fun to play with. So then you go into playful struggle.
Like we, we like these oscillations right so sincere irony, no sincerity or, or let's say pragmatic romantics is playful struggle is a good one that.
Okay, the better analytical tools you have to see how the world works, the better you see, well, this is kind of more likely going to go that way than this way.
And then the best bet for us together is probably this way.
For instance, many years ago, you wrote Jonathan before you know what the term that a modernist but you were a metamodernally minded person you wrote a, wrote a pamphlet called spiritualize and was about inner development.
You wrote about a similar stuff.
What happens today.
Inner development goals is exploding from from networks that people you at that point didn't even know.
And it's taking over.
This idea is taking over as a compliment to to a sustainable development goals.
The whole administration and the whole public sector of Costa Rica. We had a huge, huge conference in Stockholm and where they have the Nobel Prize ceremony, etc.
What's happening now, and you saw it before it was cool, and you invested in these ideas, and you were parked indirectly, if anything else, of making that happen.
That's the whole point of having good social theory that you stuff with, and doing stuff is fun and meaningful.
And I think that's a good enough reason and then, like, beyond that I don't want it. I don't want to talk anybody and like, into into buying the particular term or something like I want enough friends who are on the same page or wavelength, so that we can do cool stuff together.
That's all.
Okay, got it.
Thank you.
Yeah.
So we get one time for a question. So like two minutes.
But I would like to say one thing because I mean we got three versions of metamodernism metamodernity here and I think it's a great thing that we have several I mean this is an ecosystem of people struggling with making sense of the time that we're in, and where we could where we
could go. And I don't I don't want us to agree I actually like that we that we have three different ways of looking at this and there are more people out there and then we're exploring this from different angles and we're looking at different things.
So if you look at the arts and what's going on right now, you see one thing. If you see there is this these structures that are changing, and we need to make sure that 8 billion people have food and safety, then you look at something else.
And so, and that's good. That's the both and but it's good.
So, so we don't have to, we don't have to, you know, say who's right or which is the right version of metamodernism or metamodernity, but I do want us to be specific in what way we're using the word when we're using it.
And that if we don't, it's going to be a mess. And I was actually, there was a fitness university that held a pre conference event about our organization Nordic building and associated us with tons of with tons of stuff we do not do, because they apparently
found something that linked to something on the internet. It was very uncomfortable. So we should, we should be very specific in what ways we're using these words, but apart from that, I think it's great that we disagree.
Okay, great. And I am glad we have a little time to take a question from the audience. Sorry to be brisk there. And just to say that that feeling of coming to know it was some of the happiest intellectual time in my life that that three months of like, okay,
again, I've been talking about metamodernism for months now people keep calling me it. The word is kind of on this, you know, in a monster network. I suppose I'd better invest some time figuring out what it means.
And it was really rewarding. But it did take time. It was a lot to read a lot to think a lot to question and then to find one's own position and then to write it.
It was really rewarding. By the end of it, I felt like something good had happened. So anyway, I want to, and I hear you, Clay, Kilgore, I guess, that this is really rich and we should go over but that's David's call.
And but I can take one question. And I think the question we should take is from, let me see here go back to the list and see where we're still top of the pops.
That's gone. Is that right? David, maybe you could help me. Oh, here we go. Yeah. So actually, Greg, you've been asked to say again, which is interesting top of the pops is a question to ask read to reiterate this line you had about the nature of metamodernism being
about protecting the interiority from the degradation of postmodernism that line. Can you find that to reiterate it? It seems to be something that more than one person wants to hear.
Sure.
So, first of all, I don't think postmodernism was or is a mistake.
As kind of everybody's mentioned, it's an important intellectual and even emotional structure and tool. But the whole purpose of postmodernism is to take attention away from the center, whether the center is the mainstream,
whether the center is like the dominant white male patriarchy, whether and whether the center is the self. Postmodernism challenges the very idea of the subject and the self.
And that was an important thing to do. But when that's all you're doing and when it's kind of made to be sort of like you considered either uncool or kind of not very bright or whatever to take the self seriously and to take feelings
seriously and to take, you know, earnest appreciation of beauty. Seriously, when, when, when none of that stuff is permitted, none of us are really participating in life because what we are is selves.
And so that's the degradation that postmodern can can cause as a side effect of the good stuff that it does. And so, you know, and to me, metamodernism is motivated to be a course correction for that bad side effect.
The postmodernism engenders. And without going on too long, what the metamodern artistic and cultural products tend to do is incorporate the postmodern games and playfulness as kind of like a spoonful of sugar to help the serious earnestness go down.
Without people having to feel embarrassed about it or feel naive about it.
And, and, you know, if I had the chance to talk for hours, I could give you example after example of after example in all different areas of culture where you can see people coming up with this approach themselves but you just have to, I guess, look and see if you can find it yourself.
Thank you. Listen, I actually got that wrong that last question but it's really glad we got that iteration. And David, if you could give me a couple more minutes, there was actually a question from Brandon.
Would we be and this is a good one for all of us actually would we and we're going to, I'm going to give it one minute each roughly and we're going to end okay.
I would benefit by metamodernizing another version of that term metamodernizing some of our institutions, public, private and civil society. If so, how might we begin to do this now I'm quite sure Daniel has an answer for that.
And a whole book that answers it really. And but quickly Lena and Rachel and give them another chance at the end.
Okay, so I mean, let's take a municipality, I would go with the group sizes. And so, whenever you have, say, a city of, I don't know, 3 million people.
With relationships to other cities towns group sizes of 3 million people could be postmodern I mean that's where we need to take multiple perspectives inside the municipality we can use the modern world, and the rule of law and and democracy.
And once we get down to individual companies or departments or offices or like 1000 people that's where we can ritualize interactions and have a rich symbolic world, and we have a hierarchy of source and then when we go back down to the group size of
10 people or so and so forth. We should not keep track of everything because we need to regulate our interactions person to person and so you can take a, what to call it a home nurse taking care of old people in their own home.
I mean, you shouldn't register everything and have everything you know registered you should actually trust people and leave it to the home nurses to, to figure out what kind of service are we going to provide to Mrs Jones and what are going to provide
to Mr Smith and how we're going to you know, let them figure it out themselves, and, and, and negotiated and see what what happens. So, so we could structure, according to group sizes and governance, I guess you would call it, that would be one way of doing
Okay, thank you and Greg I'm curious if the question makes sense to you, you know, does it.
You might say it's already there. You don't have to measure modernize that doesn't.
How would you see it. I think that it's already there in the arts and an informal cultural products it's not all that much very there in institutions.
And I will say that I am a little more cautious than probably the others on this panel are about.
I'm really like really trying to intentionally implement that because we're talking about people's state of mind.
And so it starts to scarily sound to me like we're talking about engineering people's state of mind and I want to kind of leave that a little bit more up to chance and people's true nature so I'm more comfortable in this kind of happening on a more
informal level but I have seen institutions use the metamodern style in their marketing and in their self presentation and things like that, and that is exciting to me.
Great, great, great, great. So Daniel.
I think you're all about metamodernizing society in a sense. So tell me.
In a sense, in a sense, to be a question to break the answer. So, I mean, generally speaking, let's not fall into the trap trap so to speak that well, like, Soviet Union, we're now a socialist country
I think socialist or socialist artists next level socialist this socialist that and before, and within two or three or four years people were already losing faith and it wasn't fun anymore and people were.
No, our artists were hating themselves were selling out to to power and etc etc right so and of course when everything came to shove it wasn't actually better it's actually worse.
The question was what would it mean that what would actually look like I suppose you have given some thought to that metamodernizing the only answer I can give in a good enough time would be there's greater focus on inner dimensions.
And the logic, social logic pertaining to metamodernism would somehow be reflected or manifested in the relationships between human beings.
However, how do we begin, I actually agree very much with you Greg, we do begin by the arts through buying through the arts actually applying for human as today, right until I gone to this call for for events in that that realm,
given that the arts are intuitive they come first, they're free they're safer safe space in many ways institutions are the most dangerous and they come last and this like first arts and then philosophy and I suppose science etc right.
So, so I do have a very small kid and she didn't sleep her for a very well during her first couple of months, so I was up all night and you know what I did.
I watched Bojack Horseman, all six, all six seasons to just to get to know what the fuss was about, and I could definitely see it right.
But there's something about the first season, I thought well this is just a remake of the Simpsons, but it wasn't.
They got me right, it really got me like I started caring about what happened to this tragic pathetic horse character, and then there was lots of hope and beauty in the tragedy, and nastiness and futility of the story.
And I really feel it resonates right there, there really is some kind of structure, if something like that can make it that big, I think on some level, we are engineering minds, and it is, as you say, Greg happening fairly spontaneously.
We're just helping spontaneity with a bit of analysis with a bit of pointing in directions also when I point like in prophetic or, you know, directions like oh society should develop like this and that it is also in this spirit of playful struggle or fact meeting
it's not, it's not, well, it's not Marxist dialectic materialism or something like that, right.
So, so in that way I believe such things stimulate one another right those those futures that we imagine, which we know are fictional but we think are important nonetheless and because we're trying to pass postmodernity for postmodernism we we allow ourselves such dreams that that would be my
note. Okay.
Wow, great. And we've made it to the end, I believe, and
much more to say, like overall just, just starting, the line disappeared looks like she did.
And we're just, you know, there's so much more to say, and I would encourage those of you who are interested or still watching
to look at some of the written materials that are mentioned earlier in the discussion. If you don't know how to save the chat there are three dots on the right hand side of the chat near the bottom.
Click on that and press save this discussion and you'll have all the links you want to scramble to photograph them or anything.
And yeah, all of us here have written more about this, look into that but equally go and watch MetaModern artifacts and see where it takes you spiritually and politically.
And which remains for me to thank David and Rebel Wisdom for making this session possible to thank Leonard Rachel Anderson for joining us to thank Greg Denver for joining us thank Daniel Gortz for joining us.
And, and yeah, it's, we all believe it's worthwhile. It's a concept and one can only expect so much from that.
But it's a concept that can help you perceive context can help you feel differently think differently, maybe helps create new cultural codes, maybe helps point the way politically.
But certainly, if you sit with it and try to make sense of what it means for you.
I wouldn't let it will be good for you and lead to broadly good things so with that thought I will leave you.